# QBS181GroupProject
Mallory, Libby, Sean, Emma, and Carson

Introduction:	
  Mental health disorders have been - and continue to be - increasingly problematic in our society. With new technologies, social media platforms, and COVD-19, the problem is only worsening. Anxiety and depression are the most common mental health problems, and they often co-occur with eating disorders, alcohol abuse, and drug addiction. According to the NIH, young adults aged 18-25 years had the highest prevalence of any mental illness, or AMI, (29.4%) compared to adults aged 26-49 years (25.0%) and aged 50 and older (14.1%) in the year 2019 [2]. However, only 38.9% of young adults with AMI received any sort of mental health service that year despite the effective treatment options available [2].
  Throughout our analysis, we focused on depression and aimed to identify subgroups of people across the world who we might think about targeting for treatment. For instance, do mental health disorders affect males more so than females? Should we develop treatment campaigns that focus on targeting women? Likewise, are there certain age groups or education demographics that experience depression differently or more so than others? Might we consider developing treatment programs in certain levels of school or in the workplace based on those differences between age groups?

Data Description:		
  The dataset that we used for our analysis can be found here, and it comes from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation’s Global Burden of Disease study. The data includes a collection of excel sheets describing different variables that could be associated with the prevalence of depression. The data was primarily numeric because it focused on the prevalence of depression. Each sheet has longitudinal data from 1800-2017, but only the data from 1990-2017 is included in the analysis. Additionally, the data is broken down by both countries and regions across the world. For most of the analysis, region-level data was the main focus, and individual countries were used for sub-analyses. One sheet has prevalence measures of depression and several other mental health disorders, and another sheet has raw numbers of depression during the timeframe for the countries and regions included in the data. The three remaining sheets have information about prevalence by education level, sex, and age. 

Methods: 
	For preliminary cleaning, we utilized mainly Excel. For the analysis and actual data wrangling, we used R. The tidyverse, dplyr, and ggplot were helpful tools for graphical and statistical analyses. Tableau also proved useful for creating graphical representations of worldwide prevalence of depression. 

The CSV file for country-level data can be found under the full_mentalHeathDF_country.csv file, and the CSV file for region-level data can be found under the full_mentalHeathDF_region.csv file. 

The fully compiled documentation can be found in the QBS-181-Group-Project.pdf file, with markdowns explaining each aspect described below:

The Depression Age Project file has full documentation and code for the analysis broken down by age group. The Education_analysis file has full documentation and code for the analysis broken down by employment/education level. The Project Depression by Sex file has full documentation and code for the analysis broken down by sex. The Depression Prevalence by Country and Region has full documentation and code for the joining of the data, mental health disorder breakdown, and age and sex prevalence compared to one another. The dashboard can be found on github in the DepressionPrevalenceDashboard.xlsx file with documentation found in the fully compiled QBS-181-Group-Project.pdf.

We also created an R package for this project which contains functions for our plots and to pivot the data. The R package can be found at https://github.com/mallorymaher12/groupProjFunctions. The manual can be found in our group GitHub in the groupProjFunctions_0.1.0.pdf file.

Objectives and Analysis:	
	We had two main objectives: provide graphical representations of the prevalence of depression across the world (both crude measures and broken down by variables) and perform statistical analyses to compare and predict the prevalence of depression. 
	For the analysis itself, we created a graphical representation of how the raw numbers of depression have changed globally during the time period of interest. We also created graphs that depict how prevalence of depression compares to other mental health disorders and constructed a linear regression model to predict the prevalence of depression based on these other disorders.
	Furthermore, we graphically and analytically analyzed how the prevalence of depression differs by age groups for different regions of the world. We utilized line graphs to visualize how the prevalence of depression has changed over time for different age groups across the world and constructed linear regression models that predicted the prevalence of depression in different regions based on age groups. We performed a similar analysis for prevalence of depression broken down by sex with both line graphs and a linear regression model. When looking at how the prevalence of depression differs by employment level, bar graphs provided a useful representation. 

Conclusion: 
	Overall, we found that the prevalence of depression across the world has not changed significantly longitudinally. Rather, our interesting findings were rooted in the idea that we cannot treat depression the same for all age groups, sexes, employment levels, and regions of the world. For example, different age groups are especially affected by depression depending on which region of the world we are considering. In North America and Australasia, people between the ages of 15-34 show the highest prevalence of depression, but in African regions people aged 50-70+ show the highest prevalence of depression. Furthermore, females consistently showed higher prevalence of depression in all regions of the world. When considering what group of people we should be targeting for treatment, it comes down to their demographic characteristics and what part of the world we are looking at.

